[blog]Added blog for Option And Composition API (#117)
JankariTech/blog: src/assets/VueOptionVsCompositionAPI/option-vs-composition-api.md

---
title: Option Vs Composition API in Vue JS
authorName: Sagar Gurung
authorAvatar: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/46086950?v=4
authorLink: https://github.com/SagarGi
createdAt: Dec 13, 2023

> tags: vue, option API, composition API, framework, frontend

Reviewer: Vue (or Vue.js), Options API and Composition API are usually written with capital letter because they are names. Try to be consistent through the blog about how you write these terms, also regarding using quotation marks for these terms or not...

> banner: https://blog.jankaritech.com/src/assets/DockerCompose/images/OptionVsCompositionAPI.png

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
banner: https://blog.jankaritech.com/src/assets/VueOptionVsCompositionAPI/images/OptionVsCompositionAPI.png
```

---

## Background

> When it comes to defining or creating a component in the `Vue.js`, we have heard about the `Option API`. We can create specific aspects or behaviors of a component and how we want to build through it.

Author: changed!

> It provides different properties or options such as `data`, `methods`, `computed`, and `watch` through which we can organize the behavior of a component systematically. But since `Vue 3`, we have

Author: its either called properties or option

another API called `Composition API` through which we can achieve the same thing. The `Composition API` is a new highlight for many vue developers but both approaches to define a component have their

> unique pros and cons. So debating which is best among these two would be a difficult one.

Author: These blog is just a basic about how we can convert component written in option api to composition api. Also i have but some comparision at the last of the blog.

> In this blog, we will discuss how we can convert a component defined in `Option API` to `Composition API`. Also at the end, we will know how we can define the component with `Composition API`.

Reviewer: The verb 'discuss' means to look at the advantages and disadvantages of options which you briefly do at the end of the blog post where as for the first part 'learn' or 'demonstrate' is maybe a more appropriate verb. Although the larger part of the blog is kind of a tutorial, it is good to mention the discussion part in the introduction, for example:

In this blog, we will learn how we can convert a component defined in Option API to Composition API and we will also discuss the advantages of of both APIs. At the end, we will know how we can define the component with Composition API.

I have already created a simple application [Voting Details](https://github.com/SagarGi/OptionsVsCompositionVue). We will simply be examining it for the blog.

## Play around with `Voting Details`

> I have put this section in this blog since it's better to know some information about what we are building. This demo application simply stores the user's details and checks whether a user is eligible to vote are not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I have put this section in this blog since it's better to know some information about what we are building. This demo application simply stores the user's details and checks whether a user is eligible to vote or not.
```

> I have implemented two separate components but the functionality is the same for both i.e. one with Option API and another with Composition API, and we will go through a bit in brief how we can change the functionality of a component same as in Option API with Composition API.

Author: No, its just the alternative approach. The blog is about converting the component built in `Option API` to `Composition API`.

>Note: To get the application up and running, make sure [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download) is installed into your system.
```console
git clone https://github.com/SagarGi/OptionsVsCompositionVue
cd OptionsVsCompositionVue
npm install
npm run dev
```
We can access it through URL http://localhost:8000 and the application looks something like this.

![Application In Browser](/src/assets/VueOptionVsCompositionAPI/images/optionVsComposition.png)

### What's in Option API?
For the demo application, In `Voting Details` I have defined a component using option API as:

```js
<script>
  export default {
    data() {
      return {
        name: 'Sagar Gurung',
        age: 26,
        bornYear: 1997,

>         votingStatus: 'Eligible!'

Reviewer 3: Extremely honest :smile: Let's use demo data

### Converting to Composition API

1. ### Defining `data`
    To define the data necessary for a component, in composition API, we have to make them reactive to mutate or change their value with `ref` or `reactive` provided by vue.
    So it seems something like this:
    ```js
   // data
    const data = reactive({
      name: 'Sagar Gurung',
      age: 26,
      votingStatus: "Not Eligible",
      bornYear: 1997
    })
   ```

2. ### Defining methods
    Defining the methods are very simple. It is just as easy as simply defining functions in JavaScript.
    ```js
    // methods
    function increaseAge() {
      data.age++
    }

    function decreaseAge() {
      data.age--
    }
   ```
   The above function changes the `age` of the data defined in the `data` which is reactive.

3. ### Defining computed
   To define the computed property vue provides the method called `computed` through which we can explicitly define the computed function.
    ```js
   //computed
    const getVotingStatus = computed(() => {
      return (data.age >= 18) ? 'Eligible' : 'Not Eligible'
    })
   ```

>    Here the operation `getVotingStatus` returns the voting status based on the value of the data age.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Here the operation `getVotingStatus` returns the voting status based on the value of `data.age`.
```

> 4. ### Defining watch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. ### Defining `watch`
```

    Similarly, vue has provided a `watch` function to watch the change in any data properties defined.
    ```js
   //watcher
    watch(mainData.age, (oldAge, newAge) => {
      if(oldAge > newAge) {
        data.bornYear--
      } else {
        data.bornYear++
      }
    })
   ```
   We have watched data `age` in such a way that when age is increased the data `bornYear` will decrease and vice-versa.

> The overall script snippet code looks like this at last for the composition API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The whole script code snippet looks like this at last for the `Composition API`:
```

```js
import { reactive, toRefs, computed , watch} from "vue";
export default {
  setup() {
    // data
    const data = reactive({
      name: 'Sagar Gurung',
      age: 26,
      votingStatus: "Not Eligible",
      bornYear: 1997
    })
    const mainData = toRefs(data)
    // methods
    function increaseAge() {
      data.age++
    }
    function decreaseAge() {
      data.age--
    }
    //computed
    const getVotingStatus = computed(() => {
      return (data.age >= 18) ? 'Eligible' : 'Not Eligible'
    })
    //watcher
    watch(mainData.age, (oldAge, newAge) => {
      if(oldAge > newAge) {
        data.bornYear--
      } else {
        data.bornYear++
      }
    })

    return {
      ...mainData,
      increaseAge,
      decreaseAge,
      getVotingStatus
    }
  }
}
```

> In the overall code, we have imported `reactive`, `toRefs`, `computed`, and `watch` needed for building components with Composition API. The `toRefs` is used to convert the data created with `reactive` to plain objects. Also, in Composition API we need to define all those `data`, `computed`, `watch`, and `methods` inside of it as done above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the final code, we have imported `reactive`, `toRefs`, `computed`, and `watch` which are needed for building components with the `Composition API`. `toRefs` is used to convert the data created with `reactive` to plain objects. Also, when using `Composition API` we need to define all those `data`, `computed`, `watch`, and `methods` inside of it as done above.
```

Reviewer: What do you mean by inside of 'it' in the sentence above? the component?

> In the overall code, we have imported `reactive`, `toRefs`, `computed`, and `watch` needed for building components with Composition API. The `toRefs` is used to convert the data created with `reactive` to plain objects. Also, In Composition API we need to define all those `data`, `computed`, `watch`, and `methods` inside of it as done above.
> And at last, all the thing that has been defined `data`, `computed`, and `methods` needs to be returned to be exposed to the template.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the overall code, we have imported `reactive`, `toRefs`, `computed`, and `watch` needed for building components with Composition API. The `toRefs` is used to convert the data created with `reactive` to plain objects. Also, in Composition API we need to define all those `data`, `computed`, `watch`, and `methods` inside of it as done above.
At last, all the things that has been defined `data`, `computed`, and `methods` needs to be returned to be exposed to the template.
```

> At last, all the things that have been defined `data`, `computed`, and `methods` needs to be returned to be exposed to the template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At last, all the things that have been defined such as `data`, `computed`, and `methods` need to be returned to be exposed to the template.
```

> In this way, we can simply convert a component defined with `Option API` to `Composition API`. But This is just a basic example. There are lots of things that we can perform using composition API.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this way, we can simply convert a component defined with `Option API` to `Composition API`. But this is just a basic example. There are lots of things that we can perform using composition API.
```

> In this way, we can simply convert a component defined with `Option API` to `Composition API`. But this is just a basic example. There are lots of things that we can perform using composition API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this demo application we have learnt the basics of how to convert a component defined with `Option API` to `Composition API`. However there are lots of other things that we can perform using the `Composition API`.
```

Reviewer: As a reader I am interested in what are some of the other things the Composition API could do. Maybe list a few, give reference to the Vue.js documentation or point to another upcoming blog post...

> I hope this blog gave you some insights on `Composition API` and also how you can replace your component defined in `Option API` with it. But before finishing the blog I would like to highlight some.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I hope this blog gave you some insights on how to use the `Composition API` and also how you can replace your component defined in `Option API` with it. But before finishing the blog I would like to highlight some
```

> I hope this blog at least gave you some insight on `Composition API` and also how you can replace your component defined in `Option API` with it. But before finishing the blog I would like to highlight some

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
I hope this blog gave you some insights on `Composition API` and also how you can replace your component defined in `Option API` with it. But before finishing the blog I would like to highlight some
```

points regarding both `Option API` and `Composition API` so that you can relate which one to prefer before building up your projects.

> ## Option API and Composition API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `Option API` and `Composition API`
```

Reviewer: I think this is your conclusion. Maybe choose a title for this section that indicates clearer that this is your conclusion / summary...

> You can find lots of points regarding the comparison among these two APIs. Still, I would only like to highlight some of it as both approaches for building up components have their benefits and drawbacks.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can find a lot of points regarding the comparison between these two APIs. Still, I would only like to highlight some of it as both approaches for building up components have their benefits and drawbacks.
```

> You can find a lot of points regarding the comparison between these two APIs. Still, I would only like to highlight some of it as both approaches for building up components have their benefits and drawbacks.

Reviewer: Maybe add something like this to summarize the learnings more clearly: 
 
You can find a lot of points regarding the comparison between these two APIs, both approaches for building up components have their benefits and drawbacks. I will only highlight five differences which I consider most relevant for choosing whether to use the `Options API` or `Composition API` in your own project:

> 1. Composition API is new to Vue which can be called a modern way to define components whereas on the other hand Option API is an old or traditional way to build up components in Vue.

Reviewer: 'old' carries a negative notion, maybe use the term 'proven' instead?

> 2. Also, the structure and syntax for the Options API seem a bit simpler and easier to understand than that of the Composition API. It's a good choice for small projects and also for beginners. But for large and complex projects a better choice would be Composition API since it is a more flexible and modular structure that enhances better code maintainability.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Also, the structure and syntax for the Options API seems a bit simpler and easier to understand than that of the Composition API. It's a good choice for small projects and also for beginners. But for large and complex projects a better choice would be Composition API since it has a more flexible and modular structure that enhances better code maintainability.
```

> 2. Also, the structure and syntax for the Options API seems a bit simpler and easier to understand than that of the Composition API. It's a good choice for small projects and also for beginners. But for large and complex projects a better choice would be Composition API since it has a more flexible and modular structure that enhances better code maintainability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Also, the structure and syntax for the Options API seems a bit simpler and easier to understand than that of the Composition API. It's a good choice for small projects and also for beginners. But for large and more complex projects, a better choice would be Composition API since it has a more flexible and modular structure that enhances better code maintainability.
```

> 3. In addition to this since Composition API is fully based on functional, reactive programming it can be difficult for learners who are not familiar with such approach. In this case, Option API is a more captivating choice.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. In addition to this, since Composition API is fully based on functional, reactive programming it can be difficult for learners who are not familiar with such approach. In this case, Option API is a more captivating choice.
```

> 3. In addition to this, since Composition API is fully based on functional, reactive programming it can be difficult for learners who are not familiar with such approach. In this case, Option API is a more captivating choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In addition to this, since Composition API is fully based on functional, reactive programming it can be difficult for learners who are not familiar with this approach. In this case, Option API is a more captivating choice.
```

Reviewer: the adjective 'captivating' sounds a bit strange to me in this context...

> 4. Moreover `Typescript` support is better in Composition API.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Moreover, `Typescript` support is better in Composition API.
```

> 4. Moreover, `Typescript` support is better in Composition API.

Reviewer: briefly explain why --> https://vuejs.org/guide/typescript/options-api.html

> 5. Composition API supports better code reuse as it has functions and modular composition preventing more complex code and leading to more intuitive code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
5. Composition API supports better code reusability as it has functions and modular composition preventing complex code which ultimately leads to intuitive code.
```

> 5. Composition API supports better code reusability as it has functions and modular composition preventing complex code, which ultimately leads to intuitive code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Composition API supports better code reusability as it has functions and modular composition preventing complex code, which ultimately leads to more intuitive code.
```

I have put this section in this blog since it's better to know some information about what we are building. The `Voting Details` demo application stores the user's details and checks whether a user is eligible to vote or not.
I have implemented two separate components with the same functionalities, one is using `Options API` and the other is using `Composition API`. We will go through a bit in brief how we can change the functionality of a component same as in `Options API` with `Composition API`.
>Note: To get the application up and running, make sure [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download) version 16 or above is installed into your system.
```console
git clone https://github.com/SagarGi/OptionsVsCompositionVue
cd OptionsVsCompositionVue
npm install
npm run dev
```
We can access it through URL http://localhost:8000 and the application looks something like this.

![Application In Browser](/src/assets/VueOptionVsCompositionAPI/images/OptionsAPIVsCompositionAPIWebUI.png)

## What's in `Options API`?
For the demo application, in `Voting Details` I have defined a component using `Options API` as:

```js
<script>
  export default {
    data() {
      return {

>         name: 'Jhon Doe',

Author: I have used my name instead :smiley:

        age: 18,
        bornYear: 1997,
        votingStatus: 'Eligible!'
      }
    },
    methods: {
      increaseAge() {
        this.age++
      },
      decreaseAge() {
        this.age--
      }
    },
    computed: {
      getVotingStatus() {
        return (this.age >= 18) ? 'Eligible' : 'Not Eligible'
      }
    },
    watch: {
      age(oldAge, newAge) {
        if(oldAge > newAge) {
          this.bornYear--
        } else {
          this.bornYear++
        }
      }
    }
  }
</script>
```
In this demo app the properties `data`, `methods`, `computed`, and `watch` have been defined using `Options API`. I will explain the meaning of each of them in the `Composition API` section since we are converting component defined in `Options API` with `Composition API`.

## Converting to `Composition API`

1. ### Defining `data`
    When defining the data necessary for a component, in `Composition API`, we have to make it reactive to mutate or change values with `ref` or `reactive` provided by Vue.js.
    So data property can be defined as:
    ```js
   // data
    const data = reactive({
      name: 'Sagar Gurung',
      age: 26,

>       votingStatus: "Not Eligible",

Author: ah not updated! Thanks for pointing out!

At last, all the things that have been defined such as `data`, `computed`, and `methods` need to be returned to be exposed to the template.

In this demo application we have learnt the basics of how to convert a component defined with `Option API` to `Composition API`. However, there are lots of other things that we can perform using the `Composition API`.
I hope this blog gave you some insights on how to use the `Composition API` and also how you can replace your component defined in `Option API` with it.
If you want to learn more about both `Options API` and `Composition API` then you can learn more from [here](https://vuejs.org/api/composition-api-setup.html).

But before finishing the blog I would like to highlight some points regarding both `Options API` and `Composition API` so that you can relate which one to prefer before building up your projects.

## `Options API` and `Composition API`

> You can find a lot of points regarding the comparison between these two APIs, both approaches for building up components have their benefits and drawbacks. I will only highlight five differences which I consider most relevant for choosing whether to use the Options API or Composition API in your own project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find a lot of points regarding the comparison between these two APIs, both approaches for building up components have their benefits and drawbacks. I will only highlight five differences which I consider most relevant for choosing whether to use the `Options API` or `Composition API` in your own project:
```

> 1. Composition API is new to Vue which can be called a modern way to define components whereas on the other hand Options API is proven or traditional way to build up components in Vue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `Composition API` is new to Vue which can be called a modern way to define components whereas on the other hand `Options API` is a proven, traditional way to build up components in Vue.
```

I think you need an article here. 

And I think it's redundant to say both "proven" and "traditional" - traditional has a bit of a negative co-notation when speaking about technology (meaning this is how it was done in the past but nowadays it's old-fashioned to do it this way) but maybe that is what you want to say?

Author: yes instead of or a coma can do the work

> 2. Also, the structure and syntax for the Options API seems a bit simpler and easier to understand than that of the Composition API. It's a good choice for small projects and also for beginners. But for large and more complex projects, a better choice would be Composition API since it has a more flexible and modular structure that enhances better code maintainability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Also, the structure and syntax for the `Options API` seems a bit simpler and easier to understand than that of the `Composition API`. It's a good choice for small projects and also for beginners. But for large and more complex projects, a better choice would be `Composition API` since it has a more flexible and modular structure that enhances better code maintainability.
```

3. In addition to this, since `Composition API` is fully based on functional, reactive programming it can be difficult for learners who are not familiar with this approach. In this case, `Option API` could be a suitable choice.
4. Moreover, `Composition API` having a function based structure with better type inference, `Typescript` support is better than that of `Option API`.

> 5. Composition API supports better code reusability as it has functions and modular composition preventing complex code, which ultimately leads to more intuitive code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. `Composition API` supports better code reusability as it has functions and modular composition preventing complex code, which ultimately leads to more intuitive code.
```
